Blog: Quarkus 2.x platform and Quarkiverse support in the dev tools (#1039)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2021-07-01-quarkus-2x-platform-quarkiverse-registry.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'The New Quarkus 2.x Platform Model and Ecosystem Support in the Dev Tools'
date: 2021-07-01
tags: release
synopsis: 'The Quarkus 2.0.0.Final release introduces the new Quarkus platform model and the dev tools that make it easy to discover and work with the Quarkus extension ecosystem.'
author: aloubyansky
---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Platforms and Streams: a new way to discover Quarkus extensions

As you may have seen from recent Quarkus Insights episodes (#48, #55 and #57, specifically), we've made a number of changes to our tools in the 2.x stream to improve the developer experience.  When 2.0 was released, a few sharp-eyed Quarkus client users spotted some new options, and we're excited to explain what those are all about with the release of Quarkus 2.1.

**TL;DR:** We have a whole new set of more granular BOMs that you can use instead of the big `quarkus-universe-bom`. We have deployed a registry service that aligns and manages platform compatibility across these more granular BOMs, and our tools (maven, gradle, and client) know how to work with this registry to simplify the discovery of extensions that work with your project.

As of the 2.1.0.Final release, the Quarkus client uses this registry by default to resolve the Quarkus platform used by your project.

[source, bash]
----
# The client will create a project with the latest/recommended quarkus release
$ quarkus create
# You can use the --stream parameter to narrow to the latest release 
$ quarkus create -S 2.0
$ quarkus create -S 2.1
----

```

> = The Quarkus 2.x Platform Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== The Evolution of the Platform Model
```

However, badly composed BOMs may actually make it very difficult or practically impossible to achieve that. Generally speaking, the wider the scope of the dependencies a BOM manages,
the higher the risk for its users of running into incompatiblity issues including libraries that aren't managed by the BOM into their applications.

The `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, as its artifactId implies, is certainly a large and diverse BOM, including dependencies of Camel, Google Cloud Services, Kogito, OptaPlanner
and other Quarkus platform members. Importing `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` will enforce ~3600 dependency version constraints on an application. Besides the fact that it's practically
always way more than necessary, it may actually cause a serious compatibility issue that could have been avoided if the Quarkus platform BOM was not trying to manage the "universe".

E.g. including a library that depends on a different version of the `commons-beanutils:commons-beanutils` than Camel Quarkus into an application that actually does not include any

> Camel Quarkus extension may become problematic, because the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` will enforce the vesion required by Camel Quarkus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Camel Quarkus extension may become problematic, because the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` will enforce the version required by Camel Quarkus.
```

> The Quarkus 2.0.0.Final release, in addition to the monolithic `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, also includes the platform member-specific BOMs, e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of Quarkus 2.0.0.Final, in addition to the monolithic `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, we also define a number of platform-member-specific BOMs, e.g.
```

* `io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-bom:2.0.0.Final` - an equivalent of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-bom`;
* `io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-camel-bom:2.0.0.Final` - manages only the Camel Quarkus-related extensions and their required dependencies;
* `io.quarkus.platform:quarkus-kogito-bom:2.0.0.Final` - manages only the Kogito Quarkus-related extensions and their required dependencies;
* etc

> Having member-specific BOMs, applications now can import only the BOMs that are relevant to them and avoid enforcing dependency constraints from the rest of the "universe".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now applications only need to import relevant the BOMs, which avoids enforcing dependency constraints from the rest of the "universe".
```

NOTE: Given that every member-specific BOM is actually a fragment of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom`, member BOMs can be imported in any order w/o creating a conflict.

== Dev Tools Support

The dev tools, such as the Quarkus CLI, Maven or Gradle plugins, can be used to create and manage a Quarkus application project using the new platform model.

> NOTE: The `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` is still the default BOM in Quarkus 2.0.0.Final but in one of the subsequent Quarkus 2.x releases it will be deprecated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` was still the default BOM in Quarkus 2.0.0.Final. As of Quarkus 2.1.0.Final, we recommend using the more granular, 
```

> in favor of the member-specific BOMs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
member-specific BOMs instead.
```

> The easiest way to play with it would be using the new https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling[Quarkus CLI], which can be installed using e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to explore this new platform resolution capability is using the new https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling[Quarkus CLI], which can be installed using e.g.
```

```shell
curl -Ls https://sh.jbang.dev | bash -s - app install --fresh --force quarkus@quarkusio
```

Once installed you can create a project by executing

```shell

> quarkus create app --registry-client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quarkus create app
```

```

> NOTE: Without the `--registry-client` argument the created project will be importing the default `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom:2.0.0.Final`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: For earlier versions of the CLI (pre-2.1.0.Final), you need to specify the `--registry-client` option, or the created project will use the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` associated with the client's version.
```

The generated `pom.xml` will be importing the following BOM:
```xml
    <quarkus.platform.artifact-id>quarkus-bom</quarkus.platform.artifact-id>
    <quarkus.platform.group-id>io.quarkus.platform</quarkus.platform.group-id>

>     <quarkus.platform.version>2.0.0.Final</quarkus.platform.version>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <quarkus.platform.version>2.1.0.Final</quarkus.platform.version>
```

    <surefire-plugin.version>3.0.0-M5</surefire-plugin.version>
  </properties>
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>${quarkus.platform.group-id}</groupId>
        <artifactId>${quarkus.platform.artifact-id}</artifactId>
        <version>${quarkus.platform.version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
```

which is an equivalent of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-bom` that does not include any of the other platform members, such as Camel, Kogito, OptaPlanner, etc.

> However, if we did want to create a new project including a Kogito extension, it could be done like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's create another project that does include a Kogito extension:
```

```shell

> quarkus create kogito-quarkus-rules --registry-client

Reviewer 3: I think I'm a bit confused by the CLI, `kogito-quarkus-rules` is not the name of the project but a dependency?

Author: yes, it's an extension artifactId.

Reviewer 2: For the record, I made the same assumption as @gsmet about expecting the project name in the CLi args

Author: right, it's a bit confusing

Author: @ebullient just fyi

Reviewer 4: FYI, maven plugin been able to do this since day one too afaik. 

Just that our examples always verbose.

Reviewer 4: btw. i would make the registry- client be first as the list of extension to look up is the last arguments.

```suggestion
quarkus create --registry-client kogito-quarkus-rules 
```

also just noticed the cli does not seem to lookup partial names as was done in past. ill open separate issue for that

Author: > FYI, maven plugin been able to do this since day one too afaik. 
> 
> Just that our examples always verbose. 

I don't think so. It needs -Dextensions=

Reviewer: This is what the cli has always done (re: listing extensions).
Is it more natural to choose the artifactId (only) without an option, and require an option for additional extensions?

Reviewer 2: @ebullient yes, I think it's more natural to choose the artifactId and require an option for additional extensions

Like: `quarkus create app foo --with-extensions prettytime quartz`

Author: yes, but i'm pretty sure people will want to specify the groupId instead of using the default one. Should we go for `quarkus create <GAV> --extensions xxx`?

Reviewer: That would be a big change to make now (especially since this is how the CLI create path always worked.. free typing of extensions against default group/artifact/version). I mean.. the CLI wasn't advertised much, so you could argue that not many know it worked that way...

What you've shown is half-positional. `--with-extensions=one,two,three` or `-x one -x two -x three` would be more typical.

Reviewer: See quarkusio/quarkus#18368 for updated create syntax

> quarkus create --registry-client kogito-quarkus-rules 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quarkus create -x kogito-quarkus-rules kogito-app
```

```

> And the generated project would now import two BOMs (i.e. two fragments of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` that are relevant to the project):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new project imports two BOMs (i.e. two fragments of the `io.quarkus:quarkus-universe-bom` that are relevant to the project):
```

```xml
    <quarkus.platform.artifact-id>quarkus-bom</quarkus.platform.artifact-id>
    <quarkus.platform.group-id>io.quarkus.platform</quarkus.platform.group-id>

>     <quarkus.platform.version>2.0.0.Final</quarkus.platform.version>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <quarkus.platform.version>2.1.0.Final</quarkus.platform.version>
```

    <surefire-plugin.version>3.0.0-M5</surefire-plugin.version>
  </properties>
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>${quarkus.platform.group-id}</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-kogito-bom</artifactId>
        <version>${quarkus.platform.version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>${quarkus.platform.group-id}</groupId>
        <artifactId>${quarkus.platform.artifact-id}</artifactId>
        <version>${quarkus.platform.version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
      <artifactId>kogito-quarkus-rules</artifactId>
    </dependency>
```

> = Wider Quarkus Ecosystem Support in the Dev Tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Wider Quarkus Ecosystem Support in the Dev Tools
```

> https://quarkus.io/guides/platform[Quarkus platform] does not represent the whole Quarkus extension ecosystem, aka Quarkiverse, but rather a set of extensions that target

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The https://quarkus.io/guides/platform[Quarkus platform] does not represent the whole Quarkus extension ecosystem, aka Quarkiverse, but rather a set of extensions that target
```

the primary use-cases of Quarkus as a development stack. Which means that there are still plenty of Quarkus extensions that aren't present in a Quarkus platform (BOM),
e.g. most of the extensions hosted on the https://github.com/quarkiverse[Quarkiverse Hub]. These non-platform extensions could still be added

> to Quarkus applications as usual application dependencies. The Quarkus 2.0.0.Final dev tools make it very easy, e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to Quarkus applications as usual application dependencies. The Quarkus 2.1.0.Final dev tools make it very easy, e.g.
```

```shell

> quarkus create prettytime --registry-client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quarkus create -x prettytime test-time-app
```

```

will create a new Quarkus project with a non-platform https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-prettytime[Quarkus Pretty Time extension].

```xml
    <quarkus.platform.artifact-id>quarkus-bom</quarkus.platform.artifact-id>
    <quarkus.platform.group-id>io.quarkus.platform</quarkus.platform.group-id>

>     <quarkus.platform.version>2.0.0.Final</quarkus.platform.version>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <quarkus.platform.version>2.1.0.Final</quarkus.platform.version>
```

    <surefire-plugin.version>3.0.0-M5</surefire-plugin.version>
  </properties>
  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>${quarkus.platform.group-id}</groupId>
        <artifactId>${quarkus.platform.artifact-id}</artifactId>
        <version>${quarkus.platform.version}</version>
        <type>pom</type>
        <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.quarkiverse.prettytime</groupId>
      <artifactId>quarkus-prettytime</artifactId>
      <version>0.1.0</version>
    </dependency>
```

== Registry Client Support in the Maven and Gradle Plugins

> The Quarkus Maven and Gradle plugins could still be used to manage Quarkus projects. The equivalent of the CLI's `--registry-client` argument using the plugins would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Quarkus Maven and Gradle plugins can still be used to manage Quarkus projects.
```

> `-DquarkusRegistryClient` or environment variable `QUARKUS_REGISTRY_CLIENT` set to `true`, e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

```shell

> mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:2.0.0.Final:create \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:2.1.0.Final:create \
```

    -Dextensions=kogito-quarkus-rules,prettytime \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme -DprojectArtifactId=quarkus-app -DprojectVersion=1.0 \

>     -DquarkusRegistryClient

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
